first-release (#119)
iter8-tools/docs: docs/getting-started/first-release.md

---
template: main.html
---

# Your first blue-green release

> This tutorial shows how Iter8 can be used to release a basic Kubernetes application using a blue-green rollout strategy. The user declaratively describes the desired application state at any given moment. An Iter8 `release` chart assists users who describe the application state at any given moment. The chart provides the configuration needed for Iter8 to automatically deploy application versions and configure the routing to implement a blue-green rollout strategy.
> 
> In a blue-green rollout, a percentage of requests are directed to a candidate version of the model. This percentage can be changed over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how Iter8 can be used to release a basic Kubernetes application using a blue-green rollout strategy. In a blue-green rollout, a percentage of requests are directed to a candidate version of the model. This percentage can be changed over time. The user declaratively describes the desired application state at any moment by using an Iter8 `release` chart. The chart provides the configuration needed for Iter8 to automatically deploy application versions and configure the routing to implement a blue-green rollout strategy.
```

Reviewer: I think this is more concise and has better flow

![Blue-green rollout](../tutorials/images/blue-green.png)

> In this tutorial, we use the Istio service mesh to distribute inference requests between different versions of a model.

Reviewer: It's possible to use other service meshes right? Can we mention that here?

Author: I removed this comment. Other meshes would require modification to the templates right now.

???+ warning "Before you begin"
    1. Ensure that you have a Kubernetes cluster and the [`kubectl`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/kubectl/) and [`helm`](https://helm.sh/) CLIs. You can create a local Kubernetes cluster using tools like [Kind](https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/) or [Minikube](https://minikube.sigs.k8s.io/docs/).
    2. Install [Istio](https://istio.io). It suffices to install the [demo profile](https://istio.io/latest/docs/setup/getting-started/), for example by using: 
    ```shell
    istioctl install --set profile=demo -y
    ```

## Install the Iter8 controller

--8<-- "docs/getting-started/install.md"

```shell
export IMG=kalantar/iter8:20231011-1506
export CHARTS=/Users/kalantar/projects/go.workspace/src/github.com/iter8-tools/iter8/charts
helm upgrade --install iter8 $CHARTS/controller \
--set image=$IMG --set logLevel=trace \
--set clusterScoped=true
```

## Deploy initial version

> Deploy the initial version of the application using the Iter8 `release` chart by identifying the environment into which it should be deployed, a list of the versions to be deployed (here just one), and the rollout strategy to be used:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deploy the initial version of the application using the Iter8 `release` chart by identifying the environment into which it should be deployed, a list of the versions to be deployed (only one here), and the rollout strategy to be used:
```

```shell
cat <<EOF | helm upgrade --install httpbin $CHARTS/release -f -
environment: deployment-istio
application: 
  versions:
  - metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/version: v0
    image: kennethreitz/httpbin
  strategy: blue-green
EOF
```

??? note "What happens?"
    Because `environment` is set to `deployment-istio`, a `Deployment` and a `Service` object are created.

>         - The namespace `default` is inherited from the helm release namespace since it is not specified in the version or in `application.metadata`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - The namespace `default` is inherited from the Helm release namespace since it is not specified in the version or in `application.metadata`.
```

>         - The namespace `default` is inherited from the helm release namespace since it is not specified in the version or in `application.metadata`.
>         - The name `httpbin-0` is derived from the helm release name since it is not specified in the version or in `application.metadata`. The names is derived by appending the index of the version in the list of versions; `-0` in this case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - The namespace `default` is inherited from the Helm release namespace since it is not specified in the version or in `application.metadata`.
        - The name `httpbin-0` is derived from the Helm release name since it is not specified in the version or in `application.metadata`. Names are derived by appending the index of the version in the list of versions; `-0` in this case.
```

Reviewer: It's not clear what the name `httpbin-0` is in reference to. I think you need to clarify this

Author: should have been singular

        - Alternatively, a `deploymentSpecification` and/or a `serviceSpecification` could have been specified.

>     To support routing, a `Service` (of type `ExternalName`) named `default/httpbin` pointing at the Istio gateway, `istio-ingressgateway.istio-system`, is deployed. The name is the helm release name since it not specified in `application.metadata`. Further, an Iter8 [routemap](../user-guide/topics/routemap.md) is created. Finally, to support the blue-green rollout, a `ConfigMap` (`httpbin-0-weight-config`) is created to be used to manage the proportion of traffic sent to this version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    To support routing, a `Service` (of type `ExternalName`) named `default/httpbin` pointing at the Istio gateway, `istio-ingressgateway.istio-system`, is deployed. The name is the Helm release name since it not specified in `application.metadata`. Further, an Iter8 [routemap](../user-guide/topics/routemap.md) is created. Finally, to support the blue-green rollout, a `ConfigMap` named `httpbin-0-weight-config` is created to be used to manage the proportion of traffic sent to this version.
```

    (a) In a separate terminal, port-forward the ingress gateway:
    ```shell
    kubectl -n istio-system port-forward svc/istio-ingressgateway 8080:80
    ```
    (b) Send requests using the `Host` header:
    ```shell
    curl -H 'Host: httpbin.default' localhost:8080 -s -D - | grep -e '^HTTP' -e app-version
    ```

## Deploy candidate

A candidate can deployed by simply adding a second version to the list of versions comprising the application:

```shell
cat <<EOF | helm upgrade --install httpbin $CHARTS/release -f -
environment: deployment-istio
application: 
  versions:
  - metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/version: v0
    image: kennethreitz/httpbin
  - metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/version: v1
    image: kennethreitz/httpbin
  strategy: blue-green
EOF
```

??? note "About the candidate version"

>     In this tutorial, the candidate image is the same as the one for the primary version. In a real world example, it would be different. The version label (`app.kubernetes.io/version`) can be used to distinguish between versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    In this tutorial, the candidate image is the same as the one for the primary version. In a real world example, it would be different. In this case, the Kubernetes version label (`app.kubernetes.io/version`) is be used to distinguish between versions but other kinds of metadata can be used as well.
```

When the second version is deployed and ready, the Iter8 controller automatically reconfigures the routing; the `VirtualService` is updated to distribute traffic between versions based on the weights.

### Verify routing

You can verify the routing configuration by inspecting the `VirtualService` and/or by sending requests as described above. Requests will now be handled equally by both versions.

## Modify weights (optional)

To modify the request distribution between the versions, add a `weight` to each version. The weights are relative to each other.

```shell
cat <<EOF | helm upgrade --install httpbin $CHARTS/release -f -
environment: deployment-istio
application: 
  versions:
  - metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/version: v0
    image: kennethreitz/httpbin
    weight: 30
  - metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/version: v1
    image: kennethreitz/httpbin
    weight: 70
  strategy: blue-green
EOF
```

Iter8 automatically reconfigures the routing to distribute traffic between the versions based on the new weights.

### Verify routing

> You can verify the routing configuration by inspecting the `VirtualService` and/or by sending requests as described above. Seventy percent of requests will now be handled by the candidate version; the remaining thirty percent by the primary version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can verify the routing configuration by inspecting the `VirtualService` and/or by sending requests as described above. 70% of requests will now be handled by the candidate version while the remaining 30% will be handled by the primary version.
```

## Promote candidate

The candidate can be promoted by redefining the primary version and removing the candidate:

```shell
cat <<EOF | helm upgrade --install httpbin $CHARTS/release -f -
environment: deployment-istio
application: 
  versions:
  - metadata:
      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/version: v1
    image: kennethreitz/httpbin
  strategy: blue-green
EOF
```
??? note "What is different?"

>     The version label (`app.kubernetes.io/version`) was updated. In a real world example, the image would also have been updated.

Reviewer: I think there are two ways to interpret this. At the beginning of the section, you wrote:

> The candidate can be promoted by redefining the primary version and removing the candidate

This implies that the primary version has been changed and the candidate has been removed.

Whereas, this section:

> The version label (`app.kubernetes.io/version`) was updated. In a real world example, the image would also have been updated.

It implies that the candidate version has been changed and the primary has been removed.

I think it would help to reword these sections.

Author: reworded for clarity
